An operating system (OS) is software that manages computer hardware and software resources and provides common services for computer programs. The operating system is an essential component of the system software in a computer system. Application programs usually require an operating system to function.

Time-sharing operating systems schedule tasks for efficient use of the system and may also include accounting software for cost allocation of processor time, mass storage, printing, and other resources.

For hardware functions such as input and output and memory allocation, the operating system acts as an intermediary between programs and the computer hardware,[1][2] although the application code is usually executed directly by the hardware and will frequently make a system call to an OS function or be interrupted by it. Operating systems can be found on almost any device that contains a computer—from cellular phones and video game consoles to supercomputers and web servers.

Examples of popular modern operating systems include Android, BSD, iOS, Linux, OS X, QNX, Microsoft Windows,[3] Windows Phone, and IBM z/OS. All these examples, except Windows, Windows Phone and z/OS, share roots in UNIX.

Contents

    1 Types of operating systems
        1.1 Real-time
        1.2 Multi-user
        1.3 Multi-tasking vs. single-tasking
        1.4 Distributed
        1.5 Templated
        1.6 Embedded
    2 History
        2.1 Mainframes
        2.2 Microcomputers
    3 Examples of operating systems
        3.1 Unix and Unix-like operating systems
            3.1.1 BSD and its descendants
                3.1.1.1 OS X
            3.1.2 Linux and GNU
                3.1.2.1 Google Chromium OS
        3.2 Microsoft Windows
        3.3 Other
    4 Components
        4.1 Kernel
            4.1.1 Program execution
            4.1.2 Interrupts
            4.1.3 Modes
            4.1.4 Memory management
            4.1.5 Virtual memory
            4.1.6 Multitasking
            4.1.7 Disk access and file systems
            4.1.8 Device drivers
        4.2 Networking
        4.3 Security
        4.4 User interface
            4.4.1 Graphical user interfaces
    5 Real-time operating systems
    6 Operating system development as a hobby
    7 Diversity of operating systems and portability
    8 Market share
    9 See also
    10 References
    11 Further reading
    12 External links

Types of operating systems
Real-time

    A real-time operating system is a multitasking operating system that aims at executing real-time applications. Real-time operating systems often use specialized scheduling algorithms so that they can achieve a deterministic nature of behavior. The main objective of real-time operating systems is their quick and predictable response to events. They have an event-driven or time-sharing design and often aspects of both. An event-driven system switches between tasks based on their priorities or external events while time-sharing operating systems switch tasks based on clock interrupts.[citation needed]

Time-sharing operating systems schedule tasks for efficient use of the system and may also include accounting software for cost allocation of processor time, mass storage, printing, and other resources.
Multi-user

    A multi-user operating system allows multiple users to access a computer system at the same time. Time-sharing systems and Internet servers can be classified as multi-user systems as they enable multiple-user access to a computer through the sharing of time. Single-user operating systems have only one user but may allow multiple programs to run at the same time.[citation needed]

Multi-tasking vs. single-tasking

    A multi-tasking operating system allows more than one program to be running at the same time, from the point of view of human time scales. A single-tasking system has only one running program. Multi-tasking can be of two types: pre-emptive and co-operative. In pre-emptive multitasking, the operating system slices the CPU time and dedicates one slot to each of the programs. Unix-like operating systems such as Solaris and Linux support pre-emptive multitasking, as does AmigaOS. Cooperative multitasking is achieved by relying on each process to give time to the other processes in a defined manner. 16-bit versions of Microsoft Windows used cooperative multi-tasking. 32-bit versions of both Windows NT and Win9x, used pre-emptive multi-tasking. Mac OS prior to OS X used to support cooperative multitasking.[citation needed]

Distributed
Further information: Distributed system

    A distributed operating system manages a group of independent computers and makes them appear to be a single computer. The development of networked computers that could be linked and communicate with each other gave rise to distributed computing. Distributed computations are carried out on more than one machine. When computers in a group work in cooperation, they make a distributed system.

Templated

In an o/s, distributed and cloud computing context, templating refers to creating a single virtual machine image as a guest operating system, then saving it as a tool for multiple running virtual machines (Gagne, 2012, p. 716). The technique is used both in virtualization and cloud computing management, and is common in large server warehouses. [4]
Embedded

    Embedded operating systems are designed to be used in embedded computer systems. They are designed to operate on small machines like PDAs with less autonomy. They are able to operate with a limited number of resources. They are very compact and extremely efficient by design. Windows CE and Minix 3 are some examples of embedded operating systems.

History
Main article: History of operating systems
See also: Resident monitor

Early computers were built to perform a series of single tasks, like a calculator. Basic operating system features were developed in the 1950s, such as resident monitor functions that could automatically run different programs in succession to speed up processing. Operating systems did not exist in their modern and more complex forms until the early 1960s.[5] Hardware features were added, that enabled use of runtime libraries, interrupts, and parallel processing. When personal computers became popular in the 1980s, operating systems were made for them similar in concept to those used on larger computers.

In the 1940s, the earliest electronic digital systems had no operating systems. Electronic systems of this time were programmed on rows of mechanical switches or by jumper wires on plug boards. These were special-purpose systems that, for example, generated ballistics tables for the military or controlled the printing of payroll checks from data on punched paper cards. After programmable general purpose computers were invented, machine languages (consisting of strings of the binary digits 0 and 1 on punched paper tape) were introduced that sped up the programming process (Stern, 1981)[full citation needed].
In the early 1950s, a computer could execute only one program at a time. Each user had sole use of the computer for a limited period of time and would arrive at a scheduled time with program and data on punched paper cards and/or punched tape. The program would be loaded into the machine, and the machine would be set to work until the program completed or crashed. Programs could generally be debugged via a front panel using toggle switches and panel lights. It is said that Alan Turing was a master of this on the early Manchester Mark 1 machine, and he was already deriving the primitive conception of an operating system from the principles of the Universal Turing machine.[5]

Later machines came with libraries of programs, which would be linked to a user's program to assist in operations such as input and output and generating computer code from human-readable symbolic code. This was the genesis of the modern-day operating system. However, machines still ran a single job at a time. At Cambridge University in England the job queue was at one time a washing line from which tapes were hung with different colored clothes-pegs to indicate job-priority.[citation needed]
Mainframes
Main article: Mainframe computer
See also: History of IBM mainframe operating systems

Through the 1950s, many major features were pioneered in the field of operating systems, including batch processing, input/output interrupt, buffering, multitasking, spooling, runtime libraries, link-loading, and programs for sorting records in files. These features were included or not included in application software at the option of application programmers, rather than in a separate operating system used by all applications. In 1959, the SHARE Operating System was released as an integrated utility for the IBM 704, and later in the 709 and 7090 mainframes, although it was quickly supplanted by IBSYS/IBJOB on the 709, 7090 and 7094.

During the 1960s, IBM's OS/360 introduced the concept of a single OS spanning an entire product line, which was crucial for the success of the System/360 machines. IBM's current mainframe operating systems are distant descendants of this original system and applications written for OS/360 can still be run on modern machines.[citation needed]

OS/360 also pioneered the concept that the operating system keeps track of all of the system resources that are used, including program and data space allocation in main memory and file space in secondary storage, and file locking during update. When the process is terminated for any reason, all of these resources are re-claimed by the operating system.

The alternative CP-67 system for the S/360-67 started a whole line of IBM operating systems focused on the concept of virtual machines. Other operating systems used on IBM S/360 series mainframes included systems developed by IBM: COS/360 (Compatibility Operating System), DOS/360 (Disk Operating System), TSS/360 (Time Sharing System), TOS/360 (Tape Operating System), BOS/360 (Basic Operating System), and ACP (Airline Control Program), as well as a few non-IBM systems: MTS (Michigan Terminal System), MUSIC (Multi-User System for Interactive Computing), and ORVYL (Stanford Timesharing System).

Control Data Corporation developed the SCOPE operating system in the 1960s, for batch processing. In cooperation with the University of Minnesota, the Kronos and later the NOS operating systems were developed during the 1970s, which supported simultaneous batch and timesharing use. Like many commercial timesharing systems, its interface was an extension of the Dartmouth BASIC operating systems, one of the pioneering efforts in timesharing and programming languages. In the late 1970s, Control Data and the University of Illinois developed the PLATO operating system, which used plasma panel displays and long-distance time sharing networks. Plato was remarkably innovative for its time, featuring real-time chat, and multi-user graphical games.

In 1961, Burroughs Corporation introduced the B5000 with the MCP, (Master Control Program) operating system. The B5000 was a stack machine designed to exclusively support high-level languages with no machine language or assembler, and indeed the MCP was the first OS to be written exclusively in a high-level language – ESPOL, a dialect of ALGOL. MCP also introduced many other ground-breaking innovations, such as being the first commercial implementation of virtual memory. During development of the AS400, IBM made an approach to Burroughs to licence MCP to run on the AS400 hardware. This proposal was declined by Burroughs management to protect its existing hardware production. MCP is still in use today in the Unisys ClearPath/MCP line of computers.

UNIVAC, the first commercial computer manufacturer, produced a series of EXEC operating systems. Like all early main-frame systems, this batch-oriented system managed magnetic drums, disks, card readers and line printers. In the 1970s, UNIVAC produced the Real-Time Basic (RTB) system to support large-scale time sharing, also patterned after the Dartmouth BC system.

General Electric and MIT developed General Electric Comprehensive Operating Supervisor (GECOS), which introduced the concept of ringed security privilege levels. After acquisition by Honeywell it was renamed General Comprehensive Operating System (GCOS).

Digital Equipment Corporation developed many operating systems for its various computer lines, including TOPS-10 and TOPS-20 time sharing systems for the 36-bit PDP-10 class systems. Before the widespread use of UNIX, TOPS-10 was a particularly popular system in universities, and in the early ARPANET community.

From the late 1960s through the late 1970s, several hardware capabilities evolved that allowed similar or ported software to run on more than one system. Early systems had utilized microprogramming to implement features on their systems in order to permit different underlying computer architectures to appear to be the same as others in a series. In fact, most 360s after the 360/40 (except the 360/165 and 360/168) were microprogrammed implementations.

The enormous investment in software for these systems made since the 1960s caused most of the original computer manufacturers to continue to develop compatible operating systems along with the hardware. Notable supported mainframe operating systems include:

    Burroughs MCP – B5000, 1961 to Unisys Clearpath/MCP, present.
    IBM OS/360 – IBM System/360, 1966 to IBM z/OS, present.
    IBM CP-67 – IBM System/360, 1967 to IBM z/VM, present.
    UNIVAC EXEC 8 – UNIVAC 1108, 1967, to OS 2200 Unisys Clearpath Dorado, present.
Unix was originally written in assembly language.[6] Ken Thompson wrote B, mainly based on BCPL, based on his experience in the MULTICS project. B was replaced by C, and Unix, rewritten in C, developed into a large, complex family of inter-related operating systems which have been influential in every modern operating system (see History).

The Unix-like family is a diverse group of operating systems, with several major sub-categories including System V, BSD, and Linux. The name "UNIX" is a trademark of The Open Group which licenses it for use with any operating system that has been shown to conform to their definitions. "UNIX-like" is commonly used to refer to the large set of operating systems which resemble the original UNIX.

Unix-like systems run on a wide variety of computer architectures. They are used heavily for servers in business, as well as workstations in academic and engineering environments. Free UNIX variants, such as Linux and BSD, are popular in these areas.

Four operating systems are certified by The Open Group (holder of the Unix trademark) as Unix. HP's HP-UX and IBM's AIX are both descendants of the original System V Unix and are designed to run only on their respective vendor's hardware. In contrast, Sun Microsystems's Solaris Operating System can run on multiple types of hardware, including x86 and Sparc servers, and PCs. Apple's OS X, a replacement for Apple's earlier (non-Unix) Mac OS, is a hybrid kernel-based BSD variant derived from NeXTSTEP, Mach, and FreeBSD.

Unix interoperability was sought by establishing the POSIX standard. The POSIX standard can be applied to any operating system, although it was originally created for various Unix variants.
A subgroup of the Unix family is the Berkeley Software Distribution family, which includes FreeBSD, NetBSD, and OpenBSD. These operating systems are most commonly found on webservers, although they can also function as a personal computer OS. The Internet owes much of its existence to BSD, as many of the protocols now commonly used by computers to connect, send and receive data over a network were widely implemented and refined in BSD. The World Wide Web was also first demonstrated on a number of computers running an OS based on BSD called NextStep.

BSD has its roots in Unix. In 1974, University of California, Berkeley installed its first Unix system. Over time, students and staff in the computer science department there began adding new programs to make things easier, such as text editors. When Berkeley received new VAX computers in 1978 with Unix installed, the school's undergraduates modified Unix even more in order to take advantage of the computer's hardware possibilities. The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency of the US Department of Defense took interest, and decided to fund the project. Many schools, corporations, and government organizations took notice and started to use Berkeley's version of Unix instead of the official one distributed by AT&T.

Steve Jobs, upon leaving Apple Inc. in 1985, formed NeXT Inc., a company that manufactured high-end computers running on a variation of BSD called NeXTSTEP. One of these computers was used by Tim Berners-Lee as the first webserver to create the World Wide Web.

Developers like Keith Bostic encouraged the project to replace any non-free code that originated with Bell Labs. Once this was done, however, AT&T sued. Eventually, after two years of legal disputes, the BSD project came out ahead and spawned a number of free derivatives, such as FreeBSD and NetBSD.
OS X (formerly "Mac OS X") is a line of open core graphical operating systems developed, marketed, and sold by Apple Inc., the latest of which is pre-loaded on all currently shipping Macintosh computers. OS X is the successor to the original Mac OS, which had been Apple's primary operating system since 1984. Unlike its predecessor, OS X is a UNIX operating system built on technology that had been developed at NeXT through the second half of the 1980s and up until Apple purchased the company in early 1997. The operating system was first released in 1999 as Mac OS X Server 1.0, with a desktop-oriented version (Mac OS X v10.0 "Cheetah") following in March 2001. Since then, six more distinct "client" and "server" editions of OS X have been released, until the two were merged in OS X 10.7 "Lion". The most recent version is OS X 10.9 "Mavericks", which was announced on June 10, 2013, and released on October 22, 2013. Releases of OS X v10.0 through v10.8 are named after big cats. Starting with v10.9, "Mavericks", OS X versions are named after inspirational places in California.[7]

Prior to its merging with OS X, the server edition – OS X Server – was architecturally identical to its desktop counterpart and usually ran on Apple's line of Macintosh server hardware. OS X Server included work group management and administration software tools that provide simplified access to key network services, including a mail transfer agent, a Samba server, an LDAP server, a domain name server, and others. With Mac OS X v10.7 Lion, all server aspects of Mac OS X Server have been integrated into the client version and the product re-branded as "OS X" (dropping "Mac" from the name). The server tools are now offered as an application.[8]
he GNU project is a mass collaboration of programmers who seek to create a completely free and open operating system that was similar to Unix but with completely original code. It was started in 1983 by Richard Stallman, and is responsible for many of the parts of most Linux variants. Thousands of pieces of software for virtually every operating system are licensed under the GNU General Public License. Meanwhile, the Linux kernel began as a side project of Linus Torvalds, a university student from Finland. In 1991, Torvalds began work on it, and posted information about his project on a newsgroup for computer students and programmers. He received a wave of support and volunteers who ended up creating a full-fledged kernel. Programmers from GNU took notice, and members of both projects worked to integrate the finished GNU parts with the Linux kernel in order to create a full-fledged operating system.

GNU/Linux (or Linux or GNU+Linux) is a Unix-like operating system that was developed without any actual Unix code, unlike BSD and its variants. GNU/Linux can be used on a wide range of devices from supercomputers to wristwatches. The Linux kernel is released under an open source license, so anyone can read and modify its code. It has been modified to run on a large variety of electronics. Although estimates suggest that GNU/Linux is used on 1.82% of all personal computers,[9][10] it has been widely adopted for use in servers[11] and embedded systems[12] (such as cell phones). GNU/Linux has superseded Unix in most places,[which?] and is used on the 10 most powerful supercomputers in the world.[13] The Linux kernel is used in some popular distributions, such as Red Hat, Debian, Ubuntu, Linux Mint and Google's Android.


Acorn Computers

    Arthur
    ARX
    MOS
    RISC iX
    RISC OS

Amiga Inc.

    AmigaOS
        AmigaOS 1.0-3.9 (Motorola 68000)
        AmigaOS 4 (PowerPC)
    Amiga Unix (aka Amix)

Apple Inc.

    Apple II family
        Apple DOS
        Apple Pascal
        ProDOS
        GS/OS
    Apple III
        Apple SOS
    Apple Lisa
        Lisa Workshop[1]
        Lisa Operating System[2]
    Apple Macintosh
        Mac OS
        A/UX (UNIX System V with BSD extensions)
        Rhapsody
        NeXTSTEP
        OS X (formerly Mac OS X)
        OS X Server (formerly Mac OS X Server)
    Apple Network Server
        IBM AIX (Apple-customized)
    Apple MessagePad
        Newton OS
    iPhone, iPod Touch, iPad
        iOS (a subset of OS X)
    Embedded operating systems
        A/ROSE
        iPod software (unnamed embedded OS for iPod)
        Unnamed NetBSD variant for Airport Extreme and Time Capsule

Apollo Computer

    Domain/OS : One of the first network-based systems. Run on Apollo/Domain hardware. Later bought by Hewlett-Packard.

Atari

    Atari DOS (for 8-bit computers)
    Atari TOS
    Atari MultiTOS

BAE Systems

    XTS-400

Be Inc.

    BeOS
        BeIA
        BeOS r5.1d0
            magnussoft ZETA (based on BeOS r5.1d0 source code, developed by yellowTAB)

Bell Labs

    Unics ("Ken's new system," for its creator (Ken Thompson), officially Unics and then Unix, the prototypic operating system created in Bell Labs in 1969 that formed the basis for the Unix family of operating systems)
        UNIX Time-Sharing System v1
        UNIX Time-Sharing System v2
        UNIX Time-Sharing System v3
        UNIX Time-Sharing System v4
        UNIX Time-Sharing System v5
        UNIX Time-Sharing System v6
            MINI-UNIX
            PWB/UNIX
                USG
                    CB Unix
        UNIX Time-Sharing System v7 (It is from Version 7 Unix (and, to an extent, its descendants listed below) that almost all Unix-based and Unix-like operating systems descend.)
            Unix System III
            Unix System IV
            Unix System V
                Unix System V Releases 2.0, 3.0, 3.2, 4.0, and 4.2
        UNIX Time-Sharing System v8
        UNIX TIme-Sharing System v9
        UNIX Time-Sharing System v10

Non-Unix Operating Systems:

    BESYS
    Plan 9 from Bell Labs

Bull SAS

    GCOS

Burroughs Corporation

    Burroughs MCP

Control Data Corporation

    Chippewa Operating System (COS)
        MACE (Mansfield and Cahlander Executive)
            Kronos (Kronographic OS)
                NOS (Network Operating System)
                    NOS/BE NOS Batch Environment
                    NOS/VE NOS Virtual Environment
        SCOPE (Supervisory Control Of Program Execution)
        SIPROS (for Simultaneous Processing Operating System)
    EP/IX (Enhanced Performance Unix)

Convergent Technologies

    Convergent Technologies Operating System (later acquired by Unisys)

Data General

    AOS for 16-bit Data General Eclipse computers and AOS/VS for 32-bit (MV series) Eclipses, MP/AOS for microNOVA-based computers
    DG/UX
    RDOS Real-time Disk Operating System, with variants: RTOS and DOS (not related to PC DOS, MS-DOS etc.)

DataPoint

    CTOS Z-80 based, Cassette Tape Operating System for early desktop systems. Capable of up to 8 simultaneous users. Replaced by DataPoint DOS.
    DOS Intel 808x/80x86-based, Disk Operating Systems for desktop systems. Capable of up to 32 users per node. Supported a sophisticated network of nodes that were often purpose-built. The name DOS was used in these products login screens before it was popularized by IBM, Microsoft and others.

DDC-I, Inc.

    Deos Time & Space Partitioned RTOS, Certified to DO-178B, Level A since 1998
    HeartOS Posix-based Hard Real-Time Operating System

Digital Research, Inc.

    CP/M
        CP/M CP/M for Intel 8080/8085 and Zilog Z80
            Personal CP/M, a refinement of CP/M 2.2 with BDOS 2.8
            CP/M Plus with BDOS 3.0
        CP/M-68K CP/M for Motorola 68000
        CP/M-8000 CP/M for Zilog Z8000
        CP/M-86 CP/M for Intel 8088/8086
            CP/M-86 Plus
            Personal CP/M-86
        MP/M Multi-user version of CP/M-80
            MP/M II
        MP/M-86 Multi-user version of CP/M-86
            MP/M 8-16, a dual-processor variant of MP/M for 8086 and 8080 CPUs.
        Concurrent CP/M, the successor of CP/M-80 and MP/M-80
        Concurrent CP/M-86, the successor of CP/M-86 and MP/M-86
            Concurrent CP/M 8-16, a dual-processor variant of Concurrent CP/M for 8086 and 8080 CPUs.
        Concurrent CP/M-68K, a variant for the 68000

    DOS
        Concurrent DOS, the successor of Concurrent CP/M-86 with PC-MODE
            Concurrent PC DOS, a Concurrent DOS variant for IBM compatible PCs
            Concurrent DOS 8-16, a dual-processor variant of Concurrent DOS for 8086 and 8080 CPUs.
            Concurrent DOS 286
            Concurrent DOS XM, a real-mode variant of Concurrent DOS with EEMS support
            Concurrent DOS 386
                Concurrent DOS 386/MGE, a Concurrent DOS 386 variant with advanced graphics terminal capabilities
        Concurrent DOS 68K, a port of Concurrent DOS to Motorola 68000 CPUs with DOS source code portability capabilities
        FlexOS 1.0 - 2.34, a derivative of Concurrent DOS 286
            FlexOS 186, a variant of FlexOS for terminals
            FlexOS 286, a variant of FlexOS for hosts
                Siemens S5-DOS/MT, an industrial control system based on FlexOS
                IBM 4680 OS, a POS operating system based on FlexOS
                IBM 4690 OS, a POS operating system based on FlexOS
                    Toshiba 4690 OS, a POS operating system based on IBM 4690 OS and FlexOS
            FlexOS 386, a later variant of FlexOS for hosts
                IBM 4690 OS, a POS operating system based on FlexOS
                    Toshiba 4690 OS, a POS operating system based on IBM 4690 OS and FlexOS
            FlexOS 68K, a derivative of Concurrent DOS 68K
        Multiuser DOS, the successor of Concurrent DOS 386
            CCI Multiuser DOS
            Datapac Multiuser DOS
                Datapac System Manager, a derivative of Datapac Multiuser DOS
            IMS Multiuser DOS
                IMS REAL/32, a derivative of Multiuser DOS
                    IMS REAL/NG, the successor of REAL/32
        DOS Plus 1.2 - 2.1, a single-user, multi-tasking system derived from Concurrent DOS 4.1 - 5.0
        DR DOS 3.31 - 6.0, a single-user, single-tasking native DOS derived from Concurrent DOS 6.0
            Novell PalmDOS 1.0
            Novell "Star Trek"
            Novell DOS 7, a single-user, multi-tasking system derived from DR DOS
            Caldera OpenDOS 7.01
            Caldera DR-DOS 7.02 and higher

Digital/Tandem Computers/Compaq/HP

    Domain/OS (originally Aegis, from Apollo Computer who were bought by HP)
    HP-UX
    Multi-Programming Executive (from HP)
    NonStop
    OS/8
    RSTS/E (multi-user time-sharing OS for PDP-11s)
    RSX-11 (multiuser, multitasking OS for PDP-11s)
    RT-11 (single user OS for PDP-11)
    TENEX (a variant of TOPS-20 from BBN, for the PDP-10)
    TOPS-10 (for the PDP-10)
    TOPS-20 (for the PDP-10)
    Digital UNIX (derived from OSF/1, became HP's Tru64 UNIX)
    Ultrix
    VMS (originally by DEC, now by HP) for the VAX mini-computer range, Alpha and Intel Itanium 2; later renamed OpenVMS)
    WAITS (for the PDP-6 and PDP-10)

ENEA AB

    OSE Flexible, small footprint, high-performance RTOS for control processors

Fujitsu

    Towns OS

General Electric

    Real-Time Multiprogramming Operating System


    Google Chrome OS is designed to work exclusively with web applications. Announced on July 7, 2009, Chrome OS is currently publicly available and was released summer 2011. The Chrome OS source code was released on November 19, 2009 under the BSD license as Chromium OS.
        Chromium OS is an open source operating system development version of Google Chrome OS. Both operating systems are based on the Linux kernel.
    Android is an operating system for mobile devices. It consists of Dalvik (userland) with Linux (kernel), with its Linux kernel modified to add drivers for mobile device hardware and to remove unused Vanilla Linux drivers.
    es is a computer operating system developed originally by Nintendo and since 2008 by Google. It is open source and runs natively on x86 platforms.

Green Hills Software

    INTEGRITY Reliable Operating system
    INTEGRITY-178B A DO-178B certified version of INTEGRITY.
    µ-velOSity A lightweight microkernel.

Heathkit/Zenith Data Systems

    HDOS; ran on the H8 and Heath/Zenith Z-89 series
    HT-11 (a modified version of RT-11) ran on the Heathkit H11

Hewlett-Packard

    HP Multi-Programming Executive; (MPE, MPE/XL, and MPE/iX) runs on HP 3000 and HP e3000 mini-computers.
    HP-UX; runs on HP9000 and Itanium servers - from small to mainframe-class computers.
    NonStop OS; runs on HP's NonStop line of Itanium servers.

Honeywell

    Multics
    GCOS

Intel Corporation

    iRMX; real-time operating system originally created to support the Intel 8080 and 8086 processor families in embedded applications.
    ISIS-II; "Intel Systems Implementation Supervisor" was THE environment for development of software within the Intel microprocessor family in the early 1980s on their Intellec Microcomputer Development System and clones. ISIS-II worked with 8 inch floppy disks and had an editor, cross-assemblers, a linker, an object locator, debugger, compilers for PLM (PL/I for microprocessors of the 8080/86 family), a BASIC interpreter, etc. and allowed file management through a console.

IBM
Further information: History of IBM mainframe operating systems
On early IBM mainframes (1400, 1800, 701, 704, 709, 7090, and 7094)

    BESYS (for the IBM 7090)
    CTSS (The Compatible Time-Sharing System, developed at MIT's Computation Center for use on a modified IBM 7094)
    GM OS & GM-NAA I/O (for the IBM 704)
    IBSYS (tape based operating system for IBM 7090 and IBM 7094)
    IJMON (A bootable serial I/O monitor for loading programs for IBM 1400 and IBM 1800)
    SOS (SHARE Operating System, for the IBM 704 and 709)
    UMES (University of Michigan Executive System, for the IBM 704, 709, and 7090)

On IBM S/360, S/370, and successor mainframes

    OS/360 and successors on IBM S/360, S/370, and successor mainframes
        OS/360 (first official OS targeted for the System/360 architecture),
        Saw customer installations of the following variations:
            PCP (Primary Control Program, a kernel and a ground breaking automatic space allocating file system)
            MFT (original Multi-programming with a Fixed number of Tasks, replaced by MFT II)
            MFT II (Multi-Programming with a Fixed number of Tasks, had up to 15 fixed size application partitions, plus partitions for system tasks, initially defined at boot time but redefinable by operator command)
            MVT (Multi-Programming Variable Tasks, had up to 15 application regions defined dynamically, plus additional regions for system tasks)
        OS/VS (port of OS/360 targeted for the System/370 virtual memory architecture, "OS/370" is not correct name for OS/VS1 and OS/VS2, but rather refers to OS/VS2 MVS and MVS/SP Version 1),
        Customer installations in the following variations:
            SVS (Single Virtual Storage, both VS1 & VS2 began as SVS systems)
            OS/VS1 (Operating System/Virtual Storage 1, Virtual-memory version of MFT II)
            OS/VS2 (Operating System/Virtual Storage 2, Virtual-memory version of OS/MVT but without multiprocessing support)
                OS/VS2 R2 (called Multiple Virtual Storage, MVS, eliminated most need for VS1)
        MVS/SE (MVS System Extensions)
        MVS/SP (MVS System Product)
        MVS/XA (MVS/SP V2. MVS supported eXtended Architecture, 31-bit addressing)
        MVS/ESA (MVS supported Enterprise System Architecture, horizontal addressing extensions: data only address spaces called Dataspaces; a Unix environment was available starting with MVS/ESA V4R3)
        OS/390 (Upgrade from MVS, with an additional Unix environment)
        z/OS (OS/390 supported z/Architecture, 64-bit addressing)
    DOS/360 and successors on IBM S/360, S/370, and successor mainframes
        BOS/360 (early interim version of DOS/360, briefly available at a few Alpha & Beta System/360 sites)
        TOS/360 (similar to BOS above and more fleeting, able to boot and run from 2x00 series tape drives)
        DOS/360 (Disk Operating System (DOS), multi-programming system with up to 3 partitions, first commonly available OS for System/360)
            DOS/360/RJE (DOS/360 with a control program extension that provided for the monitoring of remote job entry hardware (card reader & printer) connected by dedicated phone lines)
        DOS/VS (First DOS offered on System/370 systems, provided virtual storage)
        DOS/VSE (also known as VSE, upgrade of DOS/VS, up to 14 fixed size processing partitions )
        VSE/SP (program product replacing DOS/VSE and VSE/AF)
        VSE/ESA (DOS/VSE extended virtual memory support to 32-bit addresses (Extended System Architecture)).
        z/VSE (latest version of the four decades old DOS lineage, supports 64-bit addresses, multiprocessing, multiprogramming, SNA, TCP/IP, and some virtual machine features in support of Linux workloads)
    CP/CMS (Control Program/Cambridge Monitor System) and successors on IBM S/360, S/370, and successor mainframes
        CP-40/CMS (for System/360 Model 40)
        CP-67/CMS (for System/360 Model 67)
        VM/370 (Virtual Machine / Conversational Monitor System, virtual memory operating system for System/370)
        VM/XA (VM/eXtended Architecture for System/370 with extended virtual memory)
        VM/ESA (Virtual Machine / Extended System Architecture, added 31-bit addressing to VM series)
        z/VM (z/Architecture version of the VM OS with 64-bit addressing)

Further information: History of CP/CMS

    TPF Line (Transaction Processing Facility) on IBM S/360, S/370, and successor mainframes (largely used by airlines)
        ACP (Airline Control Program)
        TPF (Transaction Processing Facility)
        z/TPF (z/Architecture extension)
    Unix-like on IBM S/360, S/370, and successor mainframes
        AIX/370 (IBM's Advanced Interactive eXecutive, a System V Unix version)
        AIX/ESA (IBM's Advanced Interactive eXecutive, a System V Unix version)
        OpenSolaris for IBM System z
        UTS (developed by Amdahl)
        z/Linux
    Others on IBM S/360, S/370, and successor mainframes:
        BOS/360 (Basic Operating System)
        MTS (Michigan Terminal System, developed by a group of universities in the US, Canada, and the UK for the IBM System/360 Model 67, System/370 series, and compatible mainframes)
        RTOS/360 (IBM's Real Time Operating System, ran on 5 NASA custom System/360-75s)[3]
        TOS/360 (Tape Operating System)
        TSS/360 (IBM's Time Sharing System)
        MUSIC/SP (developed by McGill University for IBM System/370)
        ORVYL and WYLBUR (developed by Stanford University for IBM System/360)

On IBM PC and Intel x86 based architectures

    PC DOS / IBM DOS
        PC DOS 1.x, 2.x, 3.x (developed jointly with Microsoft)
        IBM DOS 4.x, 5.0 (developed jointly with Microsoft)
        PC DOS 6.1, 6.3, 7, 2000, 7.10

See also: MS-DOS and Windows

    OS/2
        OS/2 1.x (developed jointly with Microsoft)
        OS/2 2.x
        OS/2 Warp 3
        OS/2 Warp 4
        eComStation (Warp 4.5/Workspace on Demand, rebundled by Serenity Systems International)
    IBM 4680 OS version 1 to 4, a POS operating system based on Digital Research's Concurrent DOS 286 and FlexOS 286 1.xx
        IBM 4690 OS version 1 to 6.3, a successor to 4680 OS based on Novell's FlexOS 286/FlexOS 386 2.3x
            Toshiba 4690 OS version 6.4, a successor to 4690 OS 6.3

On other IBM hardware platforms

    IBM Series/1
        EDX (Event Driven Executive)
        RPS (Realtime Programming System)
        CPS (Control Programming Support, subset of RPS)
        SerIX (Unix on Series/1)
    IBM 1130
        DMS (Disk Monitor System)
    IBM 1800
        TSX (Time Sharing eXecutive)
        MPX (Multi Programming eXecutive)
    IBM 8100
        DPCX (Distributed Processing Control eXecutive)
        DPPX (Distributed Processing Programming Executive)
    IBM System/3
        DMS (Disk Management System)
    IBM System/34, IBM System/36
        SSP (System Support Program)
    IBM System/38
        CPF (Control Program Facility)
    IBM System/88
        Stratus VOS (developed by Stratus, and used for IBM System/88, Original equipment manufacturer from Stratus)
    AS/400, iSeries, System i, Power Systems i Edition
        OS/400 (descendant of System/38 CPF, include System/36 SSP environment)
        i5/OS (extends OS/400 with significant interoperability features)
        IBM i (extends i5/OS)
    UNIX on IBM POWER
        AIX (Advanced Interactive eXecutive, a System V Unix version)
        AOS (a BSD Unix version, not related to Data General AOS)
    Others
        IBM Workplace OS (Microkernel based operating system, developed and canceled in 1990s)
        K42 (open-source research operating system on PowerPC or x86 based cache-coherent multiprocessor systems)
        Dynix (developed by Sequent, and used for IBM NUMA-Q too)

International Computers Limited

    J and MultiJob for the System 4 series mainframes
    GEORGE 2/3/4 GEneral ORGanisational Environment, used by ICL 1900 series mainframes
    Executive, used on the 290x range of minicomputers
    TME, used on the ME29 minicomputer
    ICL VME, including early variants VME/B and VME/2900, appearing on the ICL 2900 Series and Series 39 mainframes, implemented in S3
    VME/K on early smaller 2900s

LynuxWorks (originally Lynx Real-time Systems)

    LynxOS

Micrium Inc.

    MicroC/OS-II (Small pre-emptive priority based multi-tasking kernel)
    MicroC/OS-III (Small pre-emptive priority based multi-tasking kernel, with unlimited number of tasks and priorities, and round robin scheduling)

Microsoft Corporation

    Xenix (licensed version of Unix; licensed to SCO in 1987)
    MSX-DOS (developed by MS Japan for the MSX 8-bit computer)
    MS-DOS (developed jointly with IBM, versions 1.0–6.2.2)
    Windows (16-bit and 32-bit preemptive and cooperative multitasking, running on top of MS-DOS)
        Windows 1.0 (Windows 1)
        Windows 2.0 (Windows 2 - separate version for i386 processor)
        Windows 3.0 (Windows 3)
        Windows 3.1.x (Windows 3.1)
        Windows for Workgroups 3.1 (Codename Snowball)
        Windows 3.2 (Chinese-only release)
        Windows for Workgroups 3.1.1
        Windows 95 (Codename Chicago - Windows 4.0)
        Windows 98 (Codename Memphis - Windows 4.1)
        Windows Millennium Edition (Windows ME - Windows 4.9)
    Windows NT (Full 32-bit or 64-bit kernel, not dependent on MS-DOS)
        Windows NT 3.1
        Windows NT 3.5
        Windows NT 3.51
        Windows NT 4.0
        Windows 2000 (Windows NT 5.0)
        Windows XP (Windows NT 5.1)
        Windows Server 2003 (Windows NT 5.2)
        Windows Fundamentals for Legacy PCs (based on Windows XP)
        Windows Vista (Windows NT 6.0)
        Windows Azure (Cloud OS Platform) 2009
        Windows Home Server (based on Windows Server 2003)
        Windows Server 2008 (based on Windows Vista)
        Windows 7 (Windows NT 6.1)
        Windows Server 2008 R2 (based on Windows 7)
        Windows Home Server 2011 (based on Windows Server 2008 R2)
        Windows Server 2012 (based on Windows 8)
        Windows 8 (Windows NT 6.2)
        Windows Phone 8
        Windows 8.1 (Windows NT 6.3)
        Windows Server 2012 R2 (based on Windows 8.1)
        Xbox One system software
        Windows Phone 8.1
    Windows CE (OS for handhelds, embedded devices, and real-time applications that is similar to other versions of Windows)
        Windows CE 3.0
        Windows CE 5.0
        Windows CE 6.0
        Windows Mobile (based on Windows CE, but for a smaller form factor)
        Windows Phone 7
        Windows Phone 8
        Windows Phone 8.1
    Singularity - A research operating system written mostly in managed code (C#)
    Midori - A managed code operating system
    Xbox 360 system software

MontaVista Software

    MontaVista Mobilinux

NCR Corporation

    TMX - Transaction Management eXecutive

Novell

    NetWare network operating system providing high-performance network services. Has been superseded by Open Enterprise Server line, which can be based on NetWare or Linux to provide the same set of services.
    UnixWare
        Novell "SuperNOS", a never released merge of NetWare and UnixWare
    Novell "Corsair"
        Novell "Exposé"
    Open Enterprise Server, the successor to NetWare.

Quadros Systems

    RTXC Quadros RTOS proprietary C-based RTOS used in embedded systems ows

RCA

    TSOS, first OS supporting virtual addressing of the main storage and support for both timeshare and batch interface

RoweBots

    DSPnano RTOS 8/16 Bit Ultra Tiny Embedded Linux Compatible RTOS
    Unison RTOS 32 Bit Open Standards, Linux Compatible, Ultra Tiny Size, Modularity, POSIX-compliant RTOS which supports a variety of wireless modules and provides a complete set of security protocols

Samsung Electronics

    Bada
    Tizen

SCO / The SCO Group[4]

    Xenix, Unix System III based distribution for the Intel 8086/8088 architecture
        Xenix 286, Unix System V Release 2 based distribution for the Intel 80286 architecture
        Xenix 386, Unix System V Release 2 based distribution for the Intel 80386 architecture
    SCO Unix, SCO UNIX System V/386 was the first volume commercial product licensed by AT&T to use the UNIX System trademark (1989). Derived from AT&T System V Release 3.2 with an infusion of Xenix device drivers and utilities plus most of the SVR4 features
        SCO Open Desktop, the first 32-bit graphical user interface for UNIX Systems running on Intel processor-based computers. Based on SCO Unix
    SCO OpenServer 5, AT&T UNIX System V Release 3 based
    SCO OpenServer 6, SVR5 (UnixWare 7) based kernel with SCO OpenServer 5 application and binary compatibility, system administration, and user environments
    UnixWare
        UnixWare 2.x, based on AT&T System V Release 4.2MP
        UnixWare 7, UnixWare 2 kernel plus parts of 3.2v5 (UnixWare 2 + OpenServer 5 = UnixWare 7). Referred to by SCO as SVR5

Scientific Data Systems (SDS)

    Berkeley Timesharing System for the SDS 940

SYSGO

    PikeOS is a certified real time operating system for safety and security critical embedded systems

Tandy Corporation

    TRS-DOS; A floppy-disk-oriented OS supplied by Tandy/Radio Shack for their Z80-based line of personal computers. Eventually renamed as LS-DOS or LDOS.
    NewDos/80; A third-party OS for Tandy's TRS-80 personal computers.

TRON Project

    TRON (open real-time operating system kernel)
    T-Kernel

Unisys

    Unisys OS 2200 operating system

UNIVAC (later Unisys)

    EXEC I
    EXEC II
    EXEC 8 Ran on 1100 series.
    VS/9, successor to RCA TSOS

Wang Laboratories

    WPS Wang Word Processing System. Micro-code based system.
    OIS Wang Office Information System. Successor to the WPS. Combined the WPS and VP/MVP systems.

Wind River Systems

    VxWorks Small footprint, scalable, high-performance RTOS

Other
Lisp-based

    Lisp Machines, Inc. (also known as LMI) used an operating system written in MIT's Lisp Machine Lisp.
    Symbolics Genera written in a systems dialect of the Lisp programming language called ZetaLisp and Symbolics Common Lisp. Genera was ported to a virtual machine for the DEC Alpha line of computers.
    Texas Instruments' Explorer Lisp machine workstations also had systems code written in Lisp Machine Lisp.
    Xerox 1100 series of Lisp machines used an operating system also written in Interlisp, and was also ported to a virtual machine called "Medley."

Non-standard language-based

    Pilot operating system (used in Xerox Star workstations) was written in the Mesa programming language.
    PERQ Operating System (POS) was written in PERQ Pascal.

Other proprietary non-Unix-like

    Эльбрус-1 (Elbrus-1) and Эльбрус-2 used for application, job control, system programming,[5] implemented in uЭль-76 (AL-76).
    EOS; developed by ETA Systems for use in their ETA-10 line of supercomputers
    EMBOS; developed by Elxsi for use on their mini-supercomputers
    GCOS is a proprietary Operating System originally developed by General Electric
    MAI Basic Four; An OS implementing Business Basic from MAI Systems.
    Michigan Terminal System; Developed by a group of universities in the US, Canada, and the UK for use on the IBM System/360 Model 67, the System/370 series, and compatible mainframes
    MUSIC/SP; an operating system developed for the S/370, running normally under VM
    OS ES; an operating system for ES EVM
    PC-MOS/386; DOS-like, but multiuser/multitasking
    Prolog-Dispatcher; used to control Soviet Buran space ship.
    SINTRAN III; an operating system used with Norsk Data computers.
    SkyOS; commercial desktop OS for PCs
    THEOS
    TSX-32; a 32-bit operating system for x86 platform.
    TX990/TXDS, DX10 and DNOS; proprietary operating systems for TI-990 minicomputers

Other proprietary Unix-like and POSIX-compliant

    Aegis (Apollo Computer)
    Amiga Unix (Amiga ports of Unix System V release 3.2 with Amiga A2500UX and SVR4 with Amiga A3000UX. Started in 1990, last version was in 1992)
    Coherent (Unix-like OS from Mark Williams Co. for PC class computers)
    DC/OSx (DataCenter/OSx was an operating system for MIPS based systems developed by Pyramid Technology)
    DG/UX (Data General Corp)
    DNIX from DIAB
    DSPnano RTOS (POSIX nanokernel, DSP Optimized, Open Source)
    HeliOS developed and sold by Perihelion Software mainly for transputer based systems
    Interactive Unix (a port of the UNIX System V operating system for Intel x86 by Interactive Systems Corporation)
    IRIX from SGI
    MeikOS
    NeXTSTEP (developed by NeXT; a Unix-based OS based on the Mach microkernel)
    OS-9 Unix-like RTOS. (OS from Microware for Motorola 6809 based microcomputers)
    OS9/68K Unix-like RTOS. (OS from Microware for Motorola 680x0 based microcomputers; based on OS-9)
    OS-9000 Unix-like RTOS. (OS from Microware for Intel x86 based microcomputers; based on OS-9, written in C)
    OSF/1 (developed into a commercial offering by Digital Equipment Corporation)
    OpenStep
    QNX (POSIX, microkernel OS; usually a real time embedded OS)
    Rhapsody (an early form of OS X)
    RISC iX - Derived from BSD 4.3, by Acorn computers, for their ARM family of machines.
    RISC/os (a port by MIPS of 4.3BSD to the RISC MIPS architecture)
    RMX
    SCO UNIX (from SCO, bought by Caldera who renamed themselves SCO Group)
    SINIX (a port by SNI of Unix to the RISC MIPS architecture)
    Solaris (Sun's System V-based replacement for SunOS)
    SunOS (BSD-based Unix system used on early Sun hardware)
    SUPER-UX (a port of System V Release 4.2MP with features adopted from BSD and Linux for NEC SX architecture supercomputers)
    System V (a release of AT&T Unix, 'SVR4' was the 4th minor release)
    System V/AT, 386 (The first version of AT&T System V UNIX on the IBM 286 and 386 PCs, ported and sold by Microport)
    Trusted Solaris (Solaris with kernel and other enhancements to support multilevel security)
    UniFLEX (Unix-like OS from TSC for DMA-capable, extended addresses, Motorola 6809 based computers; e.g. SWTPC, GIMIX, …)
    Unicos (the version of Unix designed for Cray Supercomputers, mainly geared to vector calculations)
    UTX-32 (Developed by Gould CSD (Computer System Division), a Unix-based OS that included both BSD and System V characteristics. It was one of the first Unix based systems to receive NSA's C2 security level certification.)

Non-proprietary
Unix-like
Research Unix-like and other POSIX-compliant

    Minix (study OS developed by Andrew S. Tanenbaum in the Netherlands)
    Plan 9 (distributed OS developed at Bell Labs, based on original Unix design principles yet functionally different and going much further)
        Inferno (distributed OS derived from Plan 9, originally from Bell Labs)
        Plan B (distributed OS derived from Plan 9 and Off++ microkernel)
    Unix (OS developed at Bell Labs ca 1970 initially by Ken Thompson)
    Xinu (Study OS developed by Douglas E. Comer in the USA)

Free and open source Unix-like
Ubuntu, an example of a Unix-like system

    BSD (Berkeley Software Distribution, a variant of Unix for DEC VAX hardware)
        FreeBSD (one of the outgrowths of UC Regents' abandonment of CSRG's 'BSD Unix')
            DragonFlyBSD, forked from FreeBSD 4.8
            Darwin, created by Apple using FreeBSD and NeXTSTEP
            GhostBSD
            PC-BSD
        NetBSD (an embeded device BSD variant)
            OpenBSD forked from NetBSD
    GNU
    Linux

See also: List of Linux distributions

        Cray Linux Environment
    OpenSolaris, contains original Unix (SVR4) code. Now discontinued by Oracle in favor of Solaris 11 Express
        OpenIndiana, aims to continue development and distribution of OpenSolaris operating system. Operates under the Illumos Foundation. Uses the Illumos kernel, which is a derivative of OS/Net, which is basically a Solaris/OpenSolaris kernel with the bulk of the drivers, core libraries, and basic utilities.
        Nexenta OS, based on the OpenSolaris kernel with Ubuntu packages
        Jaris OS, based on OpenSolaris with support for Japanese
    RTEMS (Real-Time Executive for Multiprocessor Systems)
    Syllable Desktop
    Univention Corporate Server
    VSTa
        FMI/OS, successor of VSTa

Other Unix-like

    Plurix
    TUNIS (University of Toronto)

Non-Unix-like
Research non-Unix-like

    Amoeba (research OS by Andrew S. Tanenbaum)
    Croquet
    EROS microkernel, capability-based
    HelenOS research and experimental operating system
    House Haskell User's Operating System and Environment, research OS written in Haskell and C.
    ILIOS Research OS designed for routing
        CapROS microkernel EROS successor.
        Coyotos microkernel EROS successor, goal: be first formally verified OS.
    L4 Second generation microkernel
    Mach (from OS kernel research at Carnegie Mellon University; see NeXTSTEP)
    Nemesis Cambridge University research OS - detailed quality of service abilities.
    Spring (research OS from Sun Microsystems)
Free and open source non-Unix-like

    Cosmos (written in C#)
    FreeDOS (open source DOS variant)
    Haiku (open source inspired by BeOS, under development)
    ITS written by MIT students (for the PDP-6 and PDP-10)
    MonaOS (written in C++)
    osFree OS/2 Warp open source clone.
    OSv (written in C++)
    Phantom OS (persistent object oriented)
    ReactOS, open source OS designed to be binary compatible with Windows NT and its variants (Windows XP, Windows 2000, etc.); currently in development phase
    SharpOS (written in .NET C#)

    BlackBerry OS
    Embedded Linux
        Access Linux Platform
        Android
        bada
        Firefox OS (project name: Boot to Gecko)
        Openmoko Linux
        OPhone
        MeeGo (from merger of Maemo & Moblin)
        Mobilinux
        MotoMagx
        Qt Extended
        Sailfish OS
        Tizen (earlier called LiMo Platform)
        webOS
    PEN/GEOS, GEOS-SC, GEOS-SE
    iOS (a subset of OS X)
    Palm OS
    Symbian platform (successor to Symbian OS)
    Windows Mobile (superseded by Windows Phone)


