Content management system
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
	It has been suggested that this article be merged into Content management. (Discuss) Proposed since July 2013.

A content management system (CMS)[1][2][3] is a computer application that allows publishing, editing and modifying content, organizing, deleting as well as maintenance from a central interface.[4] Such systems of content management provide procedures to manage workflow in a collaborative environment.[5] These procedures can be manual steps or an automated cascade. CMSs have been available since the late 1990s.

CMSs are often used to run websites containing blogs, news, and shopping. Many corporate and marketing websites use CMSs. CMSs typically aim to avoid the need for hand coding, but may support it for specific elements or entire pages.

Contents

    1 Main features
        1.1 Web content management system
        1.2 Component content management system
    2 References
    3 See also
    4 External links

Main features
Main articles: Comparison of content management systems and Enterprise content management

The function and use of content management systems is to store and organize files, and provide version-controlled access to their data. CMS features vary widely. Simple systems showcase a handful of features, while other releases, notably enterprise systems, offer more complex and powerful functions. Most CMS include Web-based publishing, format management, revision control (version control), indexing, search, and retrieval. The CMS increments the version number when new updates are added to an already-existing file.

A CMS may serve as a central repository containing documents, movies, pictures, phone numbers, scientific data. CMSs can be used for storing, controlling, revising, semantically enriching and publishing documentation.

Distinguishing between the basic concepts of user and content. The content management system (CMS) has two elements:

    Content management application (CMA) is the front-end user interface that allows a user, even with limited expertise, to add, modify and remove content from a Web site without the intervention of a Webmaster.
    Content delivery application (CDA) compiles that information and updates the Web site.

See also: List of content management frameworks, Web template system and Template engine (Web)
Web content management system
Main article: Web content management system

A content management system[6] (Web CMS) is a bundled or stand-alone application to create, deploy, manage and store content on Web pages. Web content includes text and embedded graphics, photos, video, audio, and code (e.g., for applications) that displays content or interacts with the user. A Web CMS may catalog and index content, select or assemble content at runtime, or deliver content to specific visitors in a requested way, such as other languages. Web CMSs usually allow client control over HTML-based content, files, documents, and Web hosting plans based on the system depth and the niche it serves.
Component content management system
Main article: Component content management system

A (CCMS) specializes in the creation of documents from component parts. For example, a CCMS that uses DITA XML enables users to assemble individual component topics into a map (document) structure. These components can be reused (rather than copied and pasted) within another document or across multiple documents. This ensures that content is consistent across the entire documentation set.